Propose a new pluggable authenticators (#428)
observatorium/observatorium: docs/proposals/drafts/20211007-pluggable-authenticators.md

- The new changes must be backward-compatible. In other words, the current authentication implementation and configuration must not be broken by this change.

## How

Currently, Observatorium API supports only OIDC and mTLS based authentication, however, there are adopters who do not use standard OIDC or mTLS, instead, they use for example JWT-based access tokens with special handling that is done using private Go modules owned by those adopters.

We propose to refactor the current way of initializing the authenticators to introduce a common interface, which means all new authenticators have the same basic functions, which adopters need to implement for their custom authenticators. In addition, in this proposal, we aim to provide a self-registering mechanism, so that introducing any new authenticator does not necessarily require any additional patch/change to the existing codebase, instead, only the plugin's Go source file is needed other than patching the other source files to add the plugin. For that, we propose to use Go's importing for side-effects, where a protected map of authenticator types and their factories can be used.

## Implementation Options

> 1. Importing for Side-Effect

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Importing for Side-Effects
```

      issuerURL: http://127.0.0.1:5556/dex
      redirectURL: https://localhost:8443/oidc/test-oidc/callback
      usernameClaim: email
  rateLimits:
    - endpoint: "/api/metrics/v1/.+/api/v1/receive"
      limit: 100
      window: 1s
    - endpoint: "/api/logs/v1/.*"
      limit: 100
      window: 1s
```

## 2. Go Plugin Module

In this approach, a generic interface for authentication providers (authenticators) is introduced. authentication providers then implement that interface in a Go plugin. This plugin will be built and loaded at run time by the Observatorium API. How and where to load the plugin module is defined by the tenants configuration file.

This approach is easy to implement, very flexible in terms of adding more authenticators without any additional implementation and integration complexity. However, there are few concerns when it comes to trust and security, since the Observatorium API would consume a pre-built plugin binary as an authenticator.

**Reference**: [Writing Modular Go Programs with Plugins](https://medium.com/learning-the-go-programming-language/writing-modular-go-programs-with-plugins-ec46381ee1a9)

## 3. OAuth2 Providers

> Similar to the [generic OAuth2 providers in grafana](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/main/pkg/login/social/social.go), OAuth2 providers can be introduced and added to the list of supported OAuth2 alongside the current implementation of OIDC and mTLS to prevent any disruption for the current adopters. While this approach provides flexibility and can be considered to be an elegant and clean way of introducing more authenticators support, it requires a lot of changes in the Observatorium API.

Reviewer: I'm sorry if I'm being dense but I still don't understand what this means:

> OAuth2 providers can be introduced and added to the list of supported OAuth2 ...

Maybe there's still some word(s) missing there?

Author: @squat I hope the new changes make sense to you now.

  * @tareqmamari

## TL; DR

We propose a pluggable authenticator approach to support plugging in custom authenticators in a self-registering manner.

## Why

This proposed approach allows the adopters of Observatorium to use their own custom authenticator's implementation other than the current OIDC, mTLS or Openshift authenticators.

## Goals

- Provide a common interface for the authenticators, so that the adopters can use it to implement their own.
- Provide a self-registering mechanism for authenticators so that the adopters do not need to patch the current codebase to introduce their own authenticators.
- Adopters should be able to configure the tenants such that they can specify which authenticator type to use for each tenant.
- The new changes must be backward-compatible. In other words, the current authentication implementation and configuration must not be broken by this change.

## How

Currently, Observatorium API supports only OIDC and mTLS based authentication, however, there are adopters who do not use standard OIDC or mTLS, instead, they use for example JWT-based access tokens with special handling that is done using private Go modules owned by those adopters.

> We propose to refactor the current way of initializing the authenticators to introduce a common interface, which means all new authenticators have the same basic functions, which adopters need to implement for their custom authenticators. In addition, in this proposal, we aim to provide a self-registering mechanism, so that introducing any new authenticator does not necessarily require any additional patch/change to the existing codebase, instead, only the plugin's Go source file is needed other than patching the other source files to add the plugin. For that, we propose to use Go's importing for side-effects, where a protected map of authenticator types and their factories can be used for such scenario.

Reviewer: This last sentence is syntactically awkward. Consider simplifying it like:
```suggestion
We propose to refactor the current way of initializing the authenticators to introduce a common interface, which means all new authenticators have the same basic functions, which adopters need to implement for their custom authenticators. In addition, in this proposal, we aim to provide a self-registering mechanism, so that introducing any new authenticator does not necessarily require any additional patch/change to the existing codebase, instead, only the plugin's Go source file is needed other than patching the other source files to add the plugin. For that, we propose to use Go's importing for side-effects, where a protected map of authenticator types and their factories can be used.
```

## Implementation Options

1. Importing for side-effect
2. Go Plugin Module
3. OAuth2 Providers

## 1. Importing for Side-Effects
In this approach, importing for Go's side-effects is used to enable each authenticator to register itself through a map of authenticator types and their factories.

To onboard a new authenticator, the following is needed:

1. Implement the corresponding interface.
2. Implement a factory.
3. Register the factory in the authenticators' factories map.

With this approach, an example tenant configuration would look like:

```
- name: test-oidc
  id: 1610b0c3-c509-4592-a256-a1871353dbfa
  authenticator:
    type: oidc
    config:
      clientID: test
      clientSecret: xyz
      issuerCAPath: ./tmp/certs/ca.pem
      issuerURL: http://127.0.0.1:5556/dex
      redirectURL: https://localhost:8443/oidc/test-oidc/callback
      usernameClaim: email
  rateLimits:
    - endpoint: "/api/metrics/v1/.+/api/v1/receive"
      limit: 100
      window: 1s
    - endpoint: "/api/logs/v1/.*"
      limit: 100
      window: 1s
```

## 2. Go Plugin Module

> In this approach, a generic interface for Authentication providers (Authenticators) is introduced. Authentication providers then implement that interface in a Go plugin. This plugin will be built and loaded at run time by the Observatorium API. How and where to load the plugin module is defined by the tenants configuration file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this approach, a generic interface for authentication providers (authenticators) is introduced. Authentication providers then implement that interface in a Go plugin. This plugin will be built and loaded at run time by the Observatorium API. How and where to load the plugin module is defined by the tenants configuration file.
```

This approach is easy to implement, very flexible in terms of adding more authenticators without any additional implementation and integration complexity. However, there are few concerns when it comes to trust and security, since the Observatorium API would consume a pre-built plugin binary as an authenticator.

**Reference**: [Writing Modular Go Programs with Plugins](https://medium.com/learning-the-go-programming-language/writing-modular-go-programs-with-plugins-ec46381ee1a9)

## 3. OAuth2 Providers

> Similar to the [generic OAuth2 providers in grafana](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/main/pkg/login/social/social.go), OAuth2 providers can be introduced and injected into the supported OAuth2 alongside to the current implementation of OIDC and mTLS to prevent any disruption for the current adopters. While this approach provides flexibility and can be considered to be an elegant and clean way of introducing more authenticators support, it requires a lot of changes in the Observatorium API.

Reviewer: > injected into the supported OAuth2

What does it mean to inject something into a supported OAuth2?

Author: I updated that part, it should be: introduced and added to the list of supported OAuth2 ...

> Similar to the [generic OAuth2 providers in grafana](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/main/pkg/login/social/social.go), OAuth2 providers can be introduced and injected into the supported OAuth2 alongside to the current implementation of OIDC and mTLS to prevent any disruption for the current adopters. While this approach provides flexibility and can be considered to be an elegant and clean way of introducing more authenticators support, it requires a lot of changes in the Observatorium API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to the [generic OAuth2 providers in grafana](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/main/pkg/login/social/social.go), OAuth2 providers can be introduced and injected into the supported OAuth2 alongside the current implementation of OIDC and mTLS to prevent any disruption for the current adopters. While this approach provides flexibility and can be considered to be an elegant and clean way of introducing more authenticators support, it requires a lot of changes in the Observatorium API.
```

> However, introducing a new authenticator with private or custom implementation would require changing/patching existing Go source files in the Observatorium API. As a result, adopters need to re-apply their patch whenever migrating to a new Observatorium API release with risk to be affected by merge conflicts that must be resolved manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, introducing a new authenticator with a private or custom implementation would require changing/patching existing Go source files in the Observatorium API. As a result, adopters need to re-apply their patch whenever migrating to a new Observatorium API release with risk of being affected by merge conflicts that must be resolved manually.
```

## Conclusion

We propose to use the first approach (importing for side-effects), as it appears to be the most flexible approach to follow and requires no additional changes to onboard a new authenticator or additional resources to manage.

It worth mentioning that the new changes must be backward-compatible, in other words, they must not break neither the existing configuration nor the current authentication flows.

## Migration Plan

> The current configuration format will not be broken but will be deprecated, so immediate migration is not necessary. Tenants configured to use the old authenticators, namely OIDC, mTLS, and OpenShift, should eventually be migrated to use the new configuration format:

Reviewer: There's a `:` at the end of this sentence but there is no example following it. Instead there is another section. We should either include an example or turn this into a `.`

---
toc: true
title: 2021-10 Pluggable Authenticators
---

## Introduce Pluggable Authenticators

* **Owners**
  * @tareqmamari

## TL; DR

We propose a pluggable authenticator approach to support plugging in custom authenticators in a self-registering manner.

## Why

> This proposed approach allows the adopters of Observatorium to use their own custom authenticators' implementation other than the current OIDC, mTLS or Openshift authenticators.

Reviewer: Nit: I think the number of authenticators an implementations should agree. I.e. either `authenticator's implementation` or `authenticators' implementations`.

## Goals

- Provide a common interface for the authenticators, so that the adopters can use it to implement their own.

> - Provide a self-registering mechanism of the authenticators so that the adopters do not need to patch the current codebase to introduce their own authenticators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Provide a self-registering mechanism for authenticators so that adopters do not need to patch the current codebase to introduce their own authenticators.
```

> - Adopters should be able to configure the tenants, in a way it can specify which authenticator type to use for each tenant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Adopters should be able to configure the tenants such that they can specify which authenticator type to use for each tenant.
```

- The new changes must be backward-compatible. In other words, the current authentication implementation and configuration must not be broken by this change.

## How

> Currently, Observatorium API supports only OIDC and mTLS based authentication, however, there are adopters who do not use standard OIDC or mTLS, instead, they use for example jwt-based access tokens with special handling that is done using private go modules owned by those adopters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, Observatorium API supports only OIDC and mTLS based authentication, however, there are adopters who do not use standard OIDC or mTLS, instead, they use for example JWT-based access tokens with special handling that is done using private Go modules owned by those adopters.
```

> We propose to refactor the current way of initializing the authenticators to introduce a common interface, which means all new authenticators have the same basic functions where the adopters need to implement for their custom authenticators. In addition, in this proposal, we aim to provide a self-registering mechanism, so that introducing any new authenticator does not necessary require any additional patch/change in the existing codebase, instead, only the plugin's go source file is needed other than patching the other source files to add the plugin. For that, we propose to use importing for side-effect mechanism, where a protected map of authenticator type and their factories can be used for such scenario.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We propose to refactor the current way of initializing the authenticators to introduce a common interface, which means all new authenticators have the same basic functions, which adopters need to implement for their custom authenticators. In addition, in this proposal, we aim to provide a self-registering mechanism, so that introducing any new authenticator does not necessary require any additional patch/change in the existing codebase, instead, only the plugin's go source file is needed other than patching the other source files to add the plugin. For that, we propose to use importing for side-effect mechanism, where a protected map of authenticator type and their factories can be used for such scenario.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We propose to refactor the current way of initializing the authenticators to introduce a common interface, which means all new authenticators have the same basic functions where the adopters need to implement for their custom authenticators. In addition, in this proposal, we aim to provide a self-registering mechanism, so that introducing any new authenticator does not necessarily require any additional patch/change to the existing codebase, instead, only the plugin's Go source file is needed other than patching the other source files to add the plugin. For that, we propose to use Go's importing for side-effects, where a protected map of authenticator types and their factories can be used for such scenario.
```

## Implementation Options

> 1. Importing for side-effect

Reviewer: Nit: this list does not use consistent Casing. Please keep everything parallel for improved readability and comprehension.

Reviewer: This is still funny. Not to mention the other list items match the section titles precisely, whereas the first list item does not.
```suggestion
1. Importing for Side-Effects
```

Reviewer: Again, this is still an issue

Author: Oops @squat, I did update it, but somehow did not add that to the commit, let me check.

Author: it should be fixed now @squat.

2. Go Plugin Module

> 3. Oauth2 Providers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. OAuth2 Providers
```

> ## 1. Importing for side-effects

Reviewer: This should be title-cased
```suggestion
## 1. Importing for Side-Effects
```

> Like [Option 3](#3-oauth2-providers) except that we do not have a static list of supported authenticators. Instead, each authenticator can register themselves through a map of authenticator types and their factories.

Reviewer: I think that it's funny to talk about option three at the very beginning of the list. It means that the reader must scroll down to understand what comes here. It makes for a very bad reading experience. Instead, let's explain everything here completely. Then, option 3 can freely reference option 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Like [Option 3](#3-oauth2-providers) except that we do not have a static list of supported authenticators. Instead, each authenticator can register itself through a map of authenticator types and their factories.
```

To onboard a new authenticator, the following is needed:

1. Implement the corresponding interface.
2. Implement a factory.

> 3. Register the factory in the authenticators' factories map, this is the part where it registers itself.

Reviewer: `Register the factory .... this is the part where it registers itself.`. In other words, `the factory registers itself where it registers itself`. This seems redundant

> The factory should receive three parameters: a config map of strings and interfaces, tenant's name, and a logger instance.

Reviewer: I don't think we need to go into so much detail in the proposal. The parameters that a function receives should be part of the low level implementation rather than the high level proposal.

> With this approach, an example of tenant configuration would like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this approach, an example tenant configuration would look like:
```

```
- name: test-oidc
  id: 1610b0c3-c509-4592-a256-a1871353dbfa
  authenticator:
    type: oidc
    config:
      clientID: test
      clientSecret: xyz
      issuerCAPath: ./tmp/certs/ca.pem
      issuerURL: http://127.0.0.1:5556/dex
      redirectURL: https://localhost:8443/oidc/test-oidc/callback
      usernameClaim: email
  rateLimits:
    - endpoint: "/api/metrics/v1/.+/api/v1/receive"
      limit: 100
      window: 1s
    - endpoint: "/api/logs/v1/.*"
      limit: 100
      window: 1s
```

### 2. Go Plugin Module

> In this approach, a generic interface for Authentication providers (Authenticators) is introduced. Authentication providers then implement that interface in a go plugin. This plugin then will be built, and the compiled plugin is loaded at run time by Observatorium API, how and where to load the plugin module is defined by the tenants’ config file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this approach, a generic interface for Authentication providers (Authenticators) is introduced. Authentication providers then implement that interface in a Go plugin. This plugin will then be built and loaded at run time by the Observatorium API. How and where to load the plugin module is defined by the tenants configuration file.
```

> This approach is easy to implement, very flexible in terms of adding more Authenticators without any additional implementation and integration complexity. However, there are few concerns when it comes to trust and security, since Observatorium API would consume a pre-built plugin binary as an authenticator.

Reviewer: Let's be consistent: `authenticator` should either be used as a proper noun everywhere or nowhere, but not mixed. Let's lower case here.
```suggestion
This approach is easy to implement, very flexible in terms of adding more authenticators without any additional implementation and integration complexity. However, there are few concerns when it comes to trust and security, since Observatorium API would consume a pre-built plugin binary as an authenticator.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach is easy to implement, very flexible in terms of adding more Authenticators without any additional implementation and integration complexity. However, there are few concerns when it comes to trust and security, since the Observatorium API would consume a pre-built plugin binary as an authenticator.
```

**Reference**: [Writing Modular Go Programs with Plugins](https://medium.com/learning-the-go-programming-language/writing-modular-go-programs-with-plugins-ec46381ee1a9)

> ## 3. Oauth2 Providers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 3. OAuth2 Providers
```

> Similar to the [generic Oauth2 providers in grafana](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/main/pkg/login/social/social.go), Oauth2 providers can be introduced and injected into the supported Oauth2 besides to the current implementation of OIDC and mTLS to prevent any disruption for the current adopters. While this approach provides flexibility and it considers to be an elegant and clean way of introducing more Authenticators support, it requires a lot of changes in the Observatorium API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to the [generic OAuth2 providers in grafana](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/main/pkg/login/social/social.go), OAuth2 providers can be introduced and injected into the supported OAuth2 alongside the current implementation of OIDC and mTLS to prevent any disruption for the current adopters. While this approach provides flexibility and can be considered to be an elegant and clean way of introducing more Authenticators support, it requires a lot of changes in the Observatorium API.
```

Reviewer: Again, consistent casing please:
```suggestion
Similar to the [generic Oauth2 providers in grafana](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/blob/main/pkg/login/social/social.go), Oauth2 providers can be introduced and injected into the supported Oauth2 besides to the current implementation of OIDC and mTLS to prevent any disruption for the current adopters. While this approach provides flexibility and it considers to be an elegant and clean way of introducing more authenticators support, it requires a lot of changes in the Observatorium API.
```

> However, introducing a new authenticator with private or custom implementation would require changing/patching existing Go source files in the Observatorium API to achieve that. As a result, adopters need to re-apply their patch whenever migrating to a new Observatorium API release with risk to be affected by merge conflicts that must be resolved manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, introducing a new authenticator with a private or custom implementation would require changing/patching existing Go source files in the Observatorium API to achieve that. As a result, adopters need to re-apply their patch whenever migrating to a new Observatorium API release with the risk of being affected by merge conflicts that must be resolved manually.
```

Reviewer: `Doing X would require Y to achieve that` sounds redundant to me. I know that I need `Y` to achieve `X` because I said that `X` requires `Y.
```suggestion
However, introducing a new authenticator with private or custom implementation would require changing/patching existing Go source files in the Observatorium API. As a result, adopters need to re-apply their patch whenever migrating to a new Observatorium API release with risk to be affected by merge conflicts that must be resolved manually.
```

# Conclusion

We propose to use the first approach (importing for side-effects), as it appears to be the most flexible approach to follow and require no additional changes to onboard a new authenticator or additional resources to manage.

> It worth mentioning, that the new changes must be backward compatible, in other words, it must not break neither the existing configuration nor the current authentication flows.

Reviewer: Nit: let's be consistent about how we write `backward-compatible`. Earlier it was with a hyphen.
```suggestion
It worth mentioning, that the new changes must be backward-compatible, in other words, it must not break neither the existing configuration nor the current authentication flows.
```

> It worth mentioning, that the new changes must be backward compatible, in other words, it must not break neither the existing configuration nor the current authentication flows.

Reviewer: Let's make sure the pronoun correctly corresponds to `changes`
```suggestion
It worth mentioning that the new changes must be backward compatible, in other words, they must not break neither the existing configuration nor the current authentication flows.
```

> ## Migration plan

Reviewer: This should be title-cased
```suggestion
## Migration Plan
```

> The current configuration must not be broken, however, to migrate the current tenants that use the old configuration format with OIDC or mTLS, the configuration should be changed, but not necessary:

Reviewer: This sentence is a bit confusing to me. Here is my suggestion:
```suggestion
The current configuration format will not be broken but will be deprecated, so immediate migration is not necessary. Tenants configured to use the old authenticators, namely OIDC, mTLS, and OpenShift, should eventually be migrated to use the new configuration format:
```
